Characteristics of Big Data- Velocity.
Velocity refers to the increasing
speed at which big data is created and
the increasing speed at which the data
needs to be stored and analyzed.
Processing of data in real-time to match
its production rate as it gets generated
is a particular goal
of big data analytics.
For example,
this type of capability allows for
personalization of advertisement
on the web pages you visit
based on your recent search,
viewing, and purchase history.
If a business cannot take advantage
of the data as it gets generated, or
at the speed analysis of it is needed,
they often miss opportunities.
In order to build a case for the
importance of this dimension of big data,
let's imagine we are taking a road trip.
You're looking for
some better information to start packing.
In this case, the newer the information,
the higher its relevance
in deciding what to pack.
Would you use last month's
weather information or
data from last year at this time?
Or, would you use the weather
information from this week, yesterday or
better, today?
It makes sense to obtain the latest
information about weather and
process it in a way that
makes your decisions easier.
If the information is old,
it doesn't matter how accurate it is.
Being able to catch up with
the velocity of big data and
analyzing it as it gets generated can
even impact the quality of human life.
Sensors and smart devices monitoring
the human body can detect abnormalities
in real time and trigger immediate action,
potentially saving lives.
This type of processing is what
we call real time processing.
Real-time processing is quite
different from its remote relative,
batch processing.
Batch processing was the norm
until a couple of years ago.
Large amounts of data would be
fed into large machines and
processed for days at a time.
While this type of processing is still
very common today, decisions based on
information that is even few days old
can be catastrophic to some businesses.
Organizations which make
decisions on latest data
are more likely to hit the target.
For this reason it's important
to match the speed of processing
with the speed of information generation,
and get real time decision making power.
In addition, today's sensor-powered
socioeconomic climate
requires faster decisions.
Hence, we can not wait for
all the data to be first produced,
then fed into a machine.
There are many applications where
new information is streaming and
needs to be integrated
with existing data to
produce decisions such as emergency
response planning in a tornado, or
deciding trading strategies in real time,
or getting estimates in advertising.
We have to digest chunks of data as they
are produced and give meaningful results.
As more data comes in,
your results will need to adapt to
reflect this change in the input.
Decisions based on processing of already
acquired data such as batch processing,
may give an incomplete picture.
And hence, the applications need real
time status of the context at hand.
That is, streaming analysis.
Fortunately, with the event
of cheap sensors technology,
mobile phones, and social media,
we can obtain the latest information
at a much rapid rate and
in real time in comparison with the past.
So how do you make sure we match
the velocity of the expectations
to gain insights from big data?
With the velocity of the big data.
Rate of generation, retrieval,
or processing of data is
application specific.
The need for real time data-driven
actions within a business case is
what in the end dictates the velocity
of analytics over big data.
Sometimes precision of a minute is needed.
Sometimes half a day.
Let's look at these four paths and
discuss when to pick the right one for
your analysis.
The dollar signs next to the numbers
in this example indicate how costly
the operation is.
The more dollars, the higher the cost.
When the timeliness of processed
information plays no role in decision
making, the speed at which data
is generated becomes irrelevant.
In other words, you can wait for
as long as it takes to process data.
Days, months, weeks.
And once processing is over,
you will look at the results and
probably share them with someone.
When timeliness is not an issue,
you can choose any of the four paths.
You will likely pick the cheapest one.
When timeliness of end result is an issue
deciding which of the four paths
to choose is not so simple.
You will have to make a decision
based on cost of hardware,
time sensitivity of information,
future scenarios.
In other words,
this becomes a business driven question.
For example, if speed is really important
at all costs, you will pick path four.
As a summary, we need to pay attention
to the velocity of big data.
Streaming data gives information
on what's going on right now.
Streaming data has velocity, meaning
it gets generated at various rates.
And analysis of such data in
real time gives agility and
adaptability to maximize
benefits you want to extract.